Intro to HTTP & REST
CSCI 344: Advanced Web Technologies
Spring 2026

Weekly Announcements
Tutorial 7 – due Tonight (3/16)
HW3 – will be posted by Wednesday
Tutorial 8 – based on attendance: we will be starting it in class. There are some tricky configuration steps, so please make every effort to attend.
Office hours cancelled this Tuesday, but we’re on for Thursday and Friday!

Introduction
This week, we are going to begin interacting with server data. This includes:
Asking for data and displaying it in a useful way
Updating, creating, and deleting data from a server
To do this, we’re going to need to learn more about HTTP

Outline
Intro to Web Services and Web APIs
Intro to HTTP
Interacting with a REST APIs

Outline
Intro to Web Services and Web APIs
Intro to HTTP
Interacting with a REST APIs

Understanding how to work with Web Services & APIs is so useful!
Many organizations make their data, storage, and compute services available over the web. 
Understanding how to interact with various web services using the HTTP protocol is perhaps one of the most useful, practical skills that you can learn.
This isn’t just relevant for web browsers – all modern programming languages have a way to encode, decode, and communicate messages over HTTP.

What is a Web API?
API → “Application Programming Interface”
A set of rules that you have to follow to interact with a piece of software

Web API
An API that you access via HTTP protocol. Offers a systematic way to:
Create update, read, and delete resources over the internet
Expose parts of your database to third party clients
Allow a web client (or any client) to take advantage of resources distributed across providers, servers, organizations, etc.

REST API
A kind of Web API that honors the “REST” endpoint design conventions
7

Who uses Web APIs?
Everyone! 
Allows organizations to systematically expose parts of their data / resources for authorized users to consume simply and easily. 
How well you design your API – how easy it is to use, documentation, etc. – determines whether it gets used at all (which impacts the success of your project).
It’s useful to study how other companies and organizations have designed their APIs – learn from them

Many Organizations Publish their Data via Web APIs
Companies:
e.g., Spotify, Yelp, OpenAI, Recipes, etc.
Government Organizations:
e.g., NASA, Asheville Open Data Portal, etc.
Others:
ART Bus System
Courses at UNCA

1. How do modern web applications work?
Let’s examine and deconstruct some websites…
Spotify
ART Bus System
Courses at UNCA
Sarah made this one :)
10
10

Outline
Intro to Web Services and Web APIs
Intro to HTTP
Interacting with Web / REST APIs

HTTP: Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Web servers communicate through HTTP – a stateless protocol for encoding, decoding, and transmitting messages over the web.
Stateless mean that no memory is preserved between requests – each request must contain all the information needed on its own to fulfill the request (no stored context).
HTTP requests and responses have a header (which contains metadata about the request) and a body (which contains the request itself)
HTTP requests also have methods (GET, POST, PATCH, PUT, DELETE, etc.) – next slide.
HTTP responses have status codes that tell you whether the request was successful or not.
12
12

HTTP Methods
13
Method
Job
Description
GET
Read
Retrieves / reads a resource (or container of resources) from an address (endpoint) on a server
POST
Create
Creates a NEW resource on a server; done by posting data to an address (endpoint) on a server
PUT
Replace
Replaces a resource on a server
PATCH
Update
Updates a resource on a server
DELETE
Deletes
Deletes a resource on a server 
Methods tell the server what action they should take (verbs):
13

HTTP Status Codes
Status codes provide information re: whether your request was successful. Here is a list of them. Ones you should be familiar with:
Code
Definition
201
POST method successfully created a resource
200
Valid request made (generic success message)
400
Client posted a bad request that the server can’t understand
403
Forbidden (you don’t have access to it)
404
Resource cannot be found
500
Server error (usually because there’s a server bug)

Anatomy of an HTTP Request
Every web request has two main parts:

Headers: Tell the server how to interpret the message, and some information about the message, including:
Content-Type
Authorization
User-Agent
Body: The actual data being sent (only relevant for PUT, POST, and PATCH). Often transmitted as JSON, but other content formats accepted too.


DEMOhttps://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/ 

Outline
Finishing Tutorial 6
Intro to Web Services and Web APIs
Intro to HTTP
Interacting with Web / REST APIs

Standardizing HTTP Interfaces
In the early days of the web, there were no standards, so everyone build their Web APIs differently. 
This meant that each time a client wanted to interoperate with a different system, they would have to learn a new set of rules, conventions, etc. 

A variety of different solutions to this problem
SOAP (1998). Simple Object Access Protocol. Developed by Microsoft. Requests to formulate queries issued via XML; can get complicated to formulate, but still used.
REST (2000). Representational State Transfer Protocol. Developed by Roy Fielding. Today’s topic. A very widely used approach (at this point in time).
GraphQL (2015). Developed by Facebook and open sourced in 2015. Allows you request more fine-grained subsets of relational resources (see docs)

Web APIs & the REST Architecture
One popular way of building a Web API is by following the REST architecture guidelines. Some facts about REST:
REST: Stands for REpresentational State Transfer  
An architecture style or design criteria. Not a standard or a language
Stateless, client-server, cacheable communications protocol 
Use HTTP requests to post, read, and delete  data. 
Lightweight  
Nouns as URI, verbs as HTTP method
20
Source: https://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
20

Resource-Oriented Architecture
Resource-orientedAbout storing, manipulating, and querying resources (nouns)
Addressability   Resources are identified by URIs (which are also called endpoints)
StatelessnessNo connection state maintained between REST invocations 
ConnectednessResources should link together in their representations 
Uniform interface
Methods (verbs): HTTP GET, PUT, POST, DELETE, HEAD, OPTIONS  
HTTP status codes
21
21

1. Resource
Noun. The thing that is being represented by data / a document
Can be a physical object(s) (something you buy on Amazon)or an abstract concept (likes)
Every resource has at least one name 
Resources can be list resources (called containers) or detail resources:
Container/List Resource: https://endpoint/api/posts 
Detail Resource: https://endpoint/api/posts/6
22
Source: https://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
Note the plural convention for detail resources
22

1. Resource
Example of a resource: https://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/api/posts/60 
{
  "image_url": "https://picsum.photos/600/430?id=908",
  "user": {
    "first_name": "Timothy",
    "last_name": "Myers",
    "username": "timothy_myers",	...
  },
  "caption": "Spend catch ready administration success..."
  "likes": 853
}


23
23

2. Addressability
Endpoints: Every resource has an address, denoted by a URI (uniform resource identifier)
Example: https://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/api/posts/60  
The URI enables the client to perform “CRUD” operations	
create new resources
update the resource
read / obtain useful information about the state of a resource
delete the resource
24
Source: https://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
24

2. Addressability: Examples
Container/List Resource (create and read): 
https://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/api/posts
Detail Resource (update, delete): 
https://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/api/posts/60
Note that not all container resources make their detail resources accessible
25
25

3. Statelessness
Means that there is no “stored context” or memory across transactions:
Each request from the client to server must contain all of the information necessary to understand the request, and cannot take advantage of any stored context on the server. 
The client (i.e. your app) is responsible for:
storing and handling all application state related information on client side
sending any state information to the server whenever it is needed
26
Source: https://restfulapi.net/statelessness/ 
26

4. Connectedness
You should be able to connect / discover relationships between resources from the resource representation. Example (Comment):
{
      "text": "Text text text....",
      "post_id": 6,
      "user": {
        "first_name": "Emily",
        "last_name": "Terry",
        "username": "emily_terry",
        "email": "emily_terry@gmail.com",
		...
      }
}

27
Source: https://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
27

5. Uniform Interface
“Interface” — refers to the way we interact with and modify resources. 
In REST All resources are created, updated, read, and deleted in the same way, using the HTTP protocol methods (verbs), which are defined in the header of the request. Here are some of them:
GET
POST
PUT
PATCH
DELETE
28
Source: https://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
28

GET
Retrieves / reads a resource (or container of resources) from an address on a server
NEVER modify a resource using the GET method – you can do it (technically) but you never should.
29
29

POST
Creates a NEW resource on a server; usually done by posting to the container endpoint:

30
30

PUT & PATCH
PUT: Replaces a single resource on a server
PATCH: Updates part of a resource on a server

31
31

DELETE
Permanently deletes a resource on a server

32
32

HTTP Status Codes
Use the status codes to help your client understand success and failure. Here is a list of them.
For HW1 and HW2...
Use a 201 status code if POST is used to successfully create a resource
Use a 200 status code for a valid request (most other requests)
Use a 400 status code if user posted a bad request
Use a 403 status code if a resource is forbidden (you don’t have access)
Use a 404 status code if a resource cannot be found
Use a 500 status code if the server encountered an error

References / Credits
Much of this REST overview was derived from:
RESTful Web Serviceshttps://www.slideshare.net/cebartling/rest-web-services
Christopher Bartling
Nick Spilman
Kevin Hakanson


34
34

Interacting with a Web / REST API: Clients
You can access a REST API via many different clients (including):
Through your browser
Through Java, C, C++, Python, or any other language
In other words, servers talk to other servers via HTTP/S requests
cURL or wget (command line tools)
Postman
And more!

Interacting with a Web API: Authentication
To use a Web API, you typically need to register with the API provider and obtain an access token (like a secret password).
This enables the provider to track who is using their API and for what purposes. 
Many platforms also charge for their data services (i.e. Google, Amazon, Azure, etc.), so people’s bank accounts are often tied to their API key
We will learn some different approaches to handling authentication later in the semester
For now, I have already registered each of you with the course Photo App so that we can practice.
36

Photo App API: Practice
Navigate to https://photo-app-secured.herokuapp.com/ 
Log in:
Username: your unca username (lowercase)
Anthony and Ben: add first letter of last name
Password: password
Once you’ve logged in click on the API Docs link at the top, right-hand side of the web interface.
(Walkthrough)
